---
title: "Budget Review 2024 comment"
image:
  caption: "Image credit: [**Sapvia**](https://sapvia.co.za/budget-review-2024/)"
  placement: 2
date: "2024-05-01T00:00:00Z"
math: yes
---

The 2024 Budget offers refinement on the fiscal outlook supported by the Gold and Foreign Exchange Contingency Reserve Account (GFECRA) and also includes detail on two proposed long-term economic reforms aimed at boosting tax revenue. Consultation on ‘fiscal anchors’ being tabled will be important to maintain the better-than-expected debt trajectory in comparison to the November Medium Term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS). Mounting expenditure pressures, on the other hand, from an increasing wage bill have called for re-prioritisation of where funding is channeled which over the medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF) pose a risk. 

## Macroeconomic overview 

**Table 1 summarizes the revised estimates for key macroeconomic variables and provides a forecast over the medium-term, slightly different than initially presented in the MTBPS. Nominal GDP growth slips by 0.2 percentage points (% pts) in 2025, leading to a slightly lower average of 6.0% in the Budget review, relative to 6.1% in the MTBPS.** Owing to the importance of nominal GDP for government revenue, still hot inflation as well as lower exports might explain this. Indeed, exports is slightly down in 2025. Consumer inflation on average over the medium-term is unchanged. Despite real GDP estimated to be 0.2% pts lower for 2023, the average over the forecast period is higher, at 1.6% on average. In part, coming from a 1.3% upward revision for 2024. Notably, government consumption over the MTEF, less negative on average than projected in the November MTBPS. The rise in government consumption from -3.2% in the MTBPS to -0.7% in the Budget Review, predominately is explained by wage bill pressures in labour intensive departments (more on this in expenditure section). Remaining macroeconomic variables either remained unchanged or marginally improved for the forecast period. 

{{< table path="results1.csv" header="true" caption="Table 1: Medium-term budget framework revisions" >}}

### Structural reforms offer glimmers of economic growth boost

Much of the factors that continuously weigh on South Africa’s growth outlook are structural impediments. Treasury has set out several reforms (some having been proposed in previous Budgets) to fast track the progress. This includes:
 - Energy sector reform, which involves unbundling Eskom into generation, transmission and distribution firms which will increase the competitiveness in electricity market and promote long-term energy security. 
 - For generation capacity, registrations to produce electricity including installation of solar is steadily increasing. Lowering of barriers is crowding in more private investment with 6000 megawatts of large-scale projects worth over R100 billion, which will become operational in the medium-term. 
 - For ports, April 2024 will see the finalisation of a private public partnership aimed at increasing capacity at the Pier 2 Durban Container Terminal.
 - Similarly, freight logistics will also welcome third party access by May 2024, which offer improvements and increase capacity. 
 - Lastly for telecommunications, over R40 billion investment will be attracted following the approval of a policy that aims to improve spectrum availability and lower barriers by promoting competition. 

## Fiscal outlook

**Main budget balance remains unchanged from the November MTBPS, then narrows near the tail end of the medium-term.** Ideally, a budget deficit should be no more than 3% but owing to the overrun in expenditure, Treasury only foresees a 3.4% budget deficit by 2026/27. Furthermore, main budget balance is lower at -3.9% in 2024 Budget from -4.1% in November MTBPS, underpinning a downwardly revised gross-debt stock and debt-service cost which still ‘peaks’ by 2025/26. Primary budget surplus (revenue exceeding non-interest expenditure) slightly above the MTBPS at 0.4% is achieved for 2023/24 and will extend over the medium-term. Since the primary balance is a key driver of governments debt stock, a growing surplus over the medium-term will contribute to a fall in the  debt-to-GDP ratio.

**The Gold Foreign Exchange Contingency Reserve Account (GFECRA) is a significant downward lever and arrests the rising debt-to-GDP.** With that said, the GFECRA does not offer a sustainable nor long-term solution to the underlying fiscal challenges faced. The importance lies in it being used for solely for reducing the debt burden rather than a bail out for over run expenditure. Owing to rand/US dollar exchange rate depreciation since 2006. The current valuation of the GFECRA has accumulated up to R507.3 billion of which Treasury will drawdown on R150 billion, in three tranches over the medium-term. In turn, this lower governments borrowing requirement (consists if the budget deficit, Eskom debt relief and maturing loans). 

## Closing remarks

The nature and magnitude of various upside risks which have not materialized offers short-term relief. The conservative nature of the budget, at face value, was an improvement from the November MTBPS. On paper, the usage of GFECRA should not be viewed as a bad outcome but rather one if used adequately could be effective over the medium-term in arresting the rising borrowing requirement and gross-debt stock as well as debt-service cost. There are other nations who have drawdown on it but to be clear. However, it should not be perceived as a rainy-day fund as we know it tends to ‘rain’ quite often in South Africa. Nonetheless, the verdict is that the budget was conservative leaving us neutral on the underlying nuances. This is welcomed especially in an election year, given political affiliations which might have presented electioneering opportunities. These include the implementation of the national health insurance (of which much was not mentioned on) and the conversion of the COVID-19 SRD into a basic income grant (BIG). The main budget revenue does remain under pressure and has propelled Treasury to source an addition R15 billion funding which indeed they do via bracket creep. Meanwhile, fuel levy remains unchanged offering a bit of relief for households. Two long-term reforms, the two-pot retirement system and the minimum corporate tax will be implemented in the 2024/25 fiscal year. The former bearing fruits in the short-term and the latter in the long-term, estimated at R5 billion and R8 billion respectively. Upside risks especially on the expenditure pose a concern, but from a 2024 Budget baseline remain timid. Continued financial support will be directed on the structural issues faced at the ports by Transnet and electricity security as well as the inefficiencies in the railway system which continue to weigh heavily on the ease of doing business for the private and public sectors.  

The bottom line is that despite a better outlook on fiscal ratios as well as a growing primary budget surplus over the medium-term, long-term ‘fiscal anchors’ hinges on fiscal discipline and less frequently missed fiscal targets. This might prove to be challenging if the inability to keep rising wage pressure offshore and other (looming) expenditure pressures that may quickly materialize. Subsequently, leading to higher debt-to-GDP and debt service cost. In turn, scoring fewer own goals as a country and fixing structural impediments is the root to improving the baseline outlook first on the macro side then effectively on the fiscal side. 
